---
authors:
- admin

categories:
- research
date: "2022-08-20T00:00:00Z"
draft: false
featured: false
image:
  caption: 'Image credit: [**Unsplash**](https://www.bing.com/images/search?view=detailv2&form=SBIHVR&iss=sbi&q=imgurl:https%3A%2F%2Fwww.insureaddress.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2020%2F11%2Fnew-york-life-insurance-headquarters-11.jpg&pageurl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.insureaddress.com%2Fgeneral%2Fnew-york-life-insurance%2F&pagetl=New+York+Life+Insurance+-+Helpline+Number%2C+HQ+Address%2C+Online+Claims+-+Insurance+Address&imgalt=New+York+Life+Insurance+Company+-+Claims%2C+Helpline%2C+Address%2C+Support+&imgsz=449x299&selectedindex=0&id=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.insureaddress.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2020%2F11%2Fnew-york-life-insurance-headquarters-11.jpg&ccid=3a4QI7Sz&simid=608049455510339258&ck=2E9CBBB8DA67CB27701B99C19E506B4F&thid=OIP.3a4QI7SzeJDUG1LwHQUCSAHaE7&mediaurl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.insureaddress.com%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2020%2F11%2Fnew-york-life-insurance-headquarters-11.jpg&exph=399&expw=600&cdnurl=https%3A%2F%2Fth.bing.com%2Fth%2Fid%2FR.ddae1023b4b37890d41b52f01d050248%3Frik%3DQFJwsAa4QoW%252bDA%26pid%3DImgRaw%26r%3D0&vt=2&sim=8)'
  focal_point: ""
  placement: 2
  preview_only: false
lastmod: "2022-09-20T00:00:00Z"
projects: []
subtitle: "Welcome \U0001F44B The most reliable way to forecast the future is to try to understand the present- **John Naisbitt**"
summary: "Welcome \U0001F44B The most reliable way to forecast the future is to try to understand the present- **John Naisbitt**"
tags:
- Academic
title: 'The New York Life Insurance Company: Adjusting the investment Portfolio to Market condition'
---

## Overview

The objective of this document is to answer a series of questions regarding a text published by the authors Mary Michel and Janet Rovenpor on June 1, 2013 in the Harvard journal (NA0213), more precisely the Harvard Business School. The paper carries the following title: “New York Life Insurance Company: Adjusting the Investment Portfolio to Market Conditions”. This document will be based on a study case that is related to the life insurance company - “New York Life Insurance”. The core of the text is about concerns for the US economy in 2006 and how much NYLIC might have been affected if investment allocations were not rethought. The manager Wendlandt made some forecasting about the US economy in 2006 and consequently wanted to tilt their portfolio strategy to avoid the risk of losses and get better compensation for risks taken. Our study case will take into consideration seven questions. From this article, a few questions have been raised. I have decided to answer these questions. The questions will be outlined above the sections that answer the questions. We will also submit this word document along with the excel sheet that shows the computation of the financial ratios.

## 1.How would NYLIC’s structure as a mutual life insurance company affect its investment decisions relative to stock life insurance companies?

NYLIC by keeping its structure as a mutual life insurer enables the company to serve one constituency: NYLIC’s policyholders. As a mutual company, they manage their business to protect the long-term financial security of their policyholders, rather than the immediate returns prized by Wall Street…. While publicly owned companies are under pressure to return profits to outside investors, NYLIC can choose to retain more of their earnings to create an added margin of safety for their policyholders. 
NYLIC’s mutual structure gave it a long-term decision-making perspective. Its $ 18.7 billion in equity benefitted only its policyholders. In the NYLIC’s participating contract, holders were entitled to share in the associated contract earnings, and they are happy to receive larger dividends. However, they would accept reduced dividends if the reason for it is policyholder safety.
Compared to the stock life insurers, shareholders had potentially conflicting interests with policyholders. Generally, stock insurers face pressure to meet short-term earning targets. Their managers might be tempted to reach for yield by more aggressively investing assets, doing so they might be exposed to more risks.

## 2.Analyze the data in Gary Wendlandt’s PowerPoint slides. Why was Wendlandt concerned about the state of the US economy in early 2007? 
 
Wendlandt was concerned about the state of the US economy in 2007 and thought it was time for NYLIC to assume a “less aggressive posture” in its fixed income portfolio. He deeply sensed that difficult economic times were ahead based on several disturbing trends he observed. He advanced these arguments for his concern: Firstly, the spread between corporate bond yields and government bond yields were narrowing. Wendlandt was concerned because a portion of NYLIC’s investment portfolio was in high yield corporate bonds. If corporate issuers were default on their debt obligations, the bonds would significantly decrease in value. Therefore, NYLIC would lose a lot of money.
Secondly, underwriting standards for all forms of debt had weakened. Financial institutions had extended loans without income and asset verification. This suggested the possibility of defaults on mortgages, home equity loans, automobile loans, and credit card debt, by borrowers whose credit worthiness was questionable. So to speak, these loans were being repackaged and sold to other financial institutions as mortgage-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations. These series of events led Wendlandt to believe that risk had gone up tremendously in the marketplace.
Thirdly, private of equity firms were caught up in the euphoria of the times. They were responsible for arranging the financing for many of the large leveraged buyouts during 2006. Transactions were being financed with as much as 70 percent to 80 percent borrowed funds. Private equity firms continued, and in many cases accelerated, their business of raising money from pension funds, endowments, trusts, and high wealth individuals. All these loans were covenant-lite, which means that they carry more risks and provide less protection for the lenders. It also made it difficult to get borrowers to the negotiating table in the case of imminent default. Wendlandt mentioned that there was not enough skin in the game so equity would not be able to pay back clients if the LBOs failed.

## 3. Part of an investment manager’s job is to monitor the spread between different types of bonds and the US government’s 10 –year treasuries. Case Exhibit 9 shows that the spread between BBB bonds and treasuries was 122 basis point (bps) in December 2006. What is the effect on the pre-tax net investment income of surrendering 122 basis points yield (from BBB bonds) on, for example, an average new investment in treasuries of $1 billion? What is the risk avoided by doing so and when would it affect the balance sheet? 

When looking at spreads on BBB bonds and the default statistics, Wendlandt thought that the company was not rewarded enough for taking this kind of credit risk. Investment managers focused on the BBB bonds to their detriment. The effect on the pretax net investment income of surrendering 122 basis points yield will be in the long run more beneficial if we hold to the idea that the investment is not well compensated for the risk. They forego a return of 1.22% on the investment on BBB bonds compared to the return of 0.17% in the treasury. If they decided to invest in the treasury instead, they would have returned less 1.05 % less as a return. For example, if the managers surrendered investing $ 1 billion, they would lose $ 10,500. 
The risk avoided by surrendering investing in the bonds is the risk of default. When surrendering to the corporate bond by selling the corporate bonds, if the corporate bonds were sold at a profit price, the gain would go to accumulated other comprehensive income in the income statement. It would have affected the balance sheet in the sense that it would have increased the retained earnings. 
## 4. As a member of Wendlandt’s investment team, how would you use the information in the case to implement a “quality tilt” strategy for the available-for-sale portfolio? What additional information would you gather internally at NYLIC and from bond databases to analyze risk-adjusted performance of portfolio components? Given the information available to you, would you adjust the holdings in NYLIC’s available-for-sale portfolio? If so, how? Support your decision with facts from the case and independent analysis. For simplicity, ignore the tax effects of different types of fixed income securities. 

A tilt strategy is an investment strategy that puts greater weight of a portfolio on securities with attributes aligned to the selected strategy. In this case the “Quality tilt Strategy” seems to be ranking securities based on their default risk and rate of return and selecting those securities which are within significant risk levels and are assumed to provide a fair return base on the assessable risk level.  
On the other hand, an available-for-sale portfolio is a portfolio which includes securities purchased with the intent of selling before they reach their maturity. Available-for-sale securities are utilized for two main reasons which include liquidity provision and diversification.  In this case the largest Investment category for NYLIC is the Fixed Income Securities “Available for Sale” (shown in exhibit 4: Panel A and B). Other reasons for these choices, these securities of regulatory restrictions and the long duration of many of their policy liabilities.  
First, it is important to consider the credit quality categories that are defined for statutory reports by the National Association of Insurance Commission. These categories that correspond to credit ratings (NAIC2, BBB – or Baa3) will signal the level of risks of default attributed to the categories of securities that NYLIC invested in. In the light of these two essential components: levels of risks attributed to the type of fixed income securities and the health of the US economy, we implement a quality tilt strategy for the available sale portfolio that will still maintain diversification and ample liquidity, but a more risk averse one.  
Additional information which would be gathered from NYLIC include the liabilities of each product segment, financial ratio analysis to analyze liquidity and solvency levels, forecast future account balances and benefits and consider potential timing mismatch across respective securities. 
Additional information to be obtained from bond databases include relative performance analysis based off treasuries, analyzing relative corporate bond performance which should be reflective of corporation financial performance and lastly the movement of the fixed income securities. The reason for this is because Available-for-sale securities are primarily for liquidity purpose and are not held to maturity.  These securities must be tradable.
The economic prediction in 2007
Robert Rich made believe, in his article entitled “The great Depression ”, that the Great Recession began in December 2007 and ended in June 2009. Beyond its duration, the Great Recession was notably severe in several respects. Real gross domestic product (GDP) fell 4.3 percent from its peak in 2007Q4 to its trough in 2009Q2, the largest decline in the postwar era (based on data as of October 2013). The unemployment rate, which was 5 percent in December 2007, rose to 9.5 percent in June 2009, and peaked at 10 percent in October 2009.
The financial effects of the Great Recession were similarly outsized: Home prices fell approximately 30 percent, on average, from their mid-2006 peak to mid-2009, while the S&P 500 index fell 57 percent from its October 2007 peak to its trough in March 2009. We will consider the economic cycle and the behavior of the sectors to tilt NYLIC’s portfolio for better performance. 

 

Yes, we would adjust the holdings in NYLIC’s available for sales portfolio considering macroeconomic factors as shown above and NYLIC’s current portfolio standing. We would then rank the fixed income securities based on risk and return.  This would therefore start from US treasuries, US state and municipal bonds, foreign government bonds, corporate bonds, and lastly mortgage-backed securities, asset-backed securities and redeemable preferred securities. Secondly, we would consider relative risk-return dynamics across the different categories of securities (corporate bonds and mortgage-backed securities). Thirdly, we would review the market dynamics of each of the securities to determine tradability. This we consider extremely important because these are securities to be sold before their maturity. For example, Mr. Wendlandt has noticed the decline in underwriting standards and given the trend in the market securities such as MBSs may be overvalued, NYLIC may be able to offload more of these securities before the rest of the market picks on. Lastly, we would then begin “weighting” the portfolio towards securities of less risk but within sensible return spectrum.
 In sum, based on the information gathered on the state of the economy and the assets allocation already existed. We have presented our analysis of risk-adjusted performance based on data presented in Exhibit 3, 4, 5, and 6 show the assets allocation. Specifically, we would revamp the asset allocation given the factors that are announced on the economy. We would reallocate investment in the different asset classes. We would engineer a more secure investment strategy. Given Exhibit 3, we would reduce the investment in corporate bonds, stock and in mortgaged-backed securities and invest these funds in US treasury, US government corporation, and municipal bonds for two or three years of maturity. These securities are less risky compared to the ones aforementioned in times of volatility.         
In addition, some sectors are stronger when there is going to be inflation or recession, such as utilities, real estate, financials, and health Care. Given Exhibit 5, we would invest more funds in Energy, consumer goods, utilities and bank and finances. Doing so, we will reduce my investment in media and assets-backed securities to recuperate these funds for reallocation.

## 5. As a member of Wendlandt’s investment team, how would you use the information in the case to implement a “quality tilt” strategy in the mortgage and other loans portfolio? What additional information would you gather internally at NYLIC or elsewhere about the loans? 
The quality tilt strategy in this case includes shifting the portfolio from more credit risk to less credit risk (default risk) but within sensible bounds of returns. According to the case, the second largest category of investment assets was mortgage and other loans.  This investment category is categorized in two ways. The first way is by sector and the second way is by geographical area. Information on unpaid principal balance less the allowance for loan loss is presented in the balance sheet while their fair value is disclosed in the footnotes. Information about loan type and geographical area is provided in the notes in the Financial Statements. 
The first thing for Mr. Wendlandt’s team is to perform a current analysis of their portfolio. This will include a review of the portfolio quality to determine level of exposure relative to yields and determine the possibility of restructuring the loan portfolio (This may include selling off some loans). After analyzing the portfolio, the next thing is to perform a macroeconomic analysis to understand the current and future economic outlook. Secondly, because mortgages are categorized by sector (retail, hotel, agricultural etc.) Mr. Wendlandt’s team can rank these industries by their respective market performance. This will include analyzing the industry positions and dynamics. This is to determine whether the industry is in a position of growth or decline and determine if there exists any potential for growth.  This market analysis will often give a sketch of firm level performance. However, it is necessary in our opinion for Mr. Wendlandt’s team to perform firm level analysis. This is to obtain financial performance data (cash flows, debt level, profits etc.)  on potential borrowers.  The next step is to rank the sectors from best to worst performing, and then also rank potential borrowers in each sector and across sectors. The ranking is done primarily based on the probability of default.  Having obtained all the relevant data, the next step is to pursue borrowers who have minimal default risk and who are better structured to weather the economic downturn which Mr. Wendlandt foresees. This stage is the process through which the portfolio can now be restructured to the desired quality tilt.
This means information to be gathered is about the macroeconomic environment, industry perspective, borrower attributes, current and historic loan performance and NYLIC current financial status and position. 
However, there is some other information in NYLIC which requires to be considered. One primary reason for this is that this mortgage and other loan portfolio is less liquid compared to fixed income securities and other assets.  The first thing to consider is NYICs current liquidity levels. Do they have significant cash inflows to meet their cash requirements? The second issue to consider are the returns from other portfolio segments. Even though they are restructuring this portfolio, there may be an opportunity for higher return given similar risk exposure in other securities. The third and fourth issue include product segment and timing. This is very important particularly in the case of future policy benefits.

##6. Analyze the recent financial performance of NYLIC, Metlife and Prudential. Where do you see areas of strength? Are there areas for improvement? 
In this section, we are going to analyze the financial performance of NYLIC, Metlife and Prudential. This analysis will target areas of strength and weakness of each insurance company and see to what extent we can provide recommendation for improvement.  
Since Life insurers follow many industries specific accounting rules, to conduct analysis, we will resort to financial ratios related to profitability and solvency.  First, considering the operating profit margin, as of 2006, we see that NYLIC outperformed Metlife and Prudential. It reported an operating profit margin of   16.78% while Metlife and Prudential reported 9.15% and 13.62% respectively. However, in absolute terms across the three institutions, we can see that Metlife generated the greatest operating income. Total loss ratios for NYLIC and Prudential Financial are 1.92 and 2.00 respectively. Metlife reported the lowest loss ratio of 1.77. This means that its benefits expenses are lower compared to its premium as revenues. When comparing each institution’s solvency ratio, NYLIC financed its assets with less debts compared to Metlife and Prudential Financial. Metlife’s shareholders have the highest return on their investment than the two other institutions’ shareholders. NYLIC managed to have the least operating expenses to revenue across the three financial institutions. It reported a ratio 0.83% while Metlife and Prudential reported 0.91% and 0.86% respectively. Comparing, ROA. It is observed that as of 2006, NYLIC reported a higher ROA of 1.31% compared to Metlife and Prudential which reported ROA’s of 1.25% and 079% respectively.
One of the weaknesses observed is that Prudential Financial’s revenues are less than Metlife’s (Exhibit 3), however Metlife’s dividends to policyholder are greater than Metlife. It is not a good sign for Metlife to have negative realized investment gain. It means in 2006 and 2005, they sold assets at lower price than they bought them whereas it is different for NYLIC and Prudential Financials because the realized investments are gains and not losses. The loss for Metlife will reduce its total revenues and net income. NYLIC has bought shares in other company to generate more income from noncontrolling interest. Prudential Financial made some venture with another company. But what is interesting is that Metlife did not have a joint venture nor any noncontrolling interest. 
In summary, as of 2006, NYLIC reported stronger financial ratios as compared to the other two financial institutions.  The financial ratios are reported in Table (1) and Table (2) below. One weakness was the lack of consistency in the financial performance across the Financial Institutions.   

### Table 1 – Financial ratios for comparing performance - NYLIC 	 MetLife  Prudential Financial

| Financial Performance       | 2006   | 2005   | 2004  |
| :---------------------------    |:-----: |:------:| -----:|
|Loss ratio             | 1.92   |1.96    |1.90   |
| Operating Profit      |3521    |1212    | 2236  |
 

### Table 2- Financial Ratios (Income Statement- Balance Sheet) - NYLIC	Metlife	Prudential
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE	2006-5	2005-4	2004-3	2006-5	2005-4	2004-3	2006-5	2005-4	2004-3
Net investment income as % of average Investment Assets	5.78%	5.77%	5.67%	5.19%	5.56%	5.46%	4.96%	4.82%	4.74%
Asset Turnover (Net Revenue/ Total assets)	11.95%	10.65%	11.37%	8.51%	10.68%	11.35%	7.40%	7.74%	7.79%
Return on Assets	1.31%	0.52%	0.85%	1.25%	1.12%	0.81%	0.79%	0.86%	0.62%
returns on Equity (Net Income/Shareholder's equity)	2.45%	0.96%	1.59%	2.44%	2.44%	1.58%	1.56%	1.67%	1.31%

## 7. Which behavioral finance processing errors and biases may prevent some investment managers from choosing a quality tilt strategy before financial markets deteriorate?

There are a few errors and biases which may prevent some investment managers from choosing a quality tilt strategy before financial markets deteriorate. 
The first bias that considered is confirmation bias. This is a situation where an investor would focus only on the information that supports their own view or opinions.  Mr. Wendlandt highlights a trend towards mortgage-backed securities, collateralized debt obligations and private equity. There was great return in these investments, and the investment manager would focus more on the information on returns and not on information regards to the drop in underwriting standards of the debt instruments in the case of MBSs and CDOs and the structure of covenants in private equity LBOs as opposed to only paying attention to the information on the returns. Mr. Wendlandt chose to focus on these issues and hence advise on the tilt strategy. 
The next bias is referred to as the trend-chasing bias. This is a situation where the investment manager will invest in winning assets or securities at the time. This is also referred to as the momentum strategy. As Mr. Wendlandt highlights there is a euphoria towards Private equity transactions and investment in MBSs and CDOs. In this case the investment manager would choose to invest in these securities as they are considered as the securities are considered as winners.  
Disposition effect bias is the third bias. The disposition effect is the tendency for investment managers to sell assets whose values have increased and hold on to assets whose values have dropped. This may prevent the investment manager from selecting the most efficient quality tilt strategy. 
An error which can prevent the investment manager from selecting a quality tilt strategy can occur during financial analysis. For instance, Mr. Wendlandt highlights the case that NYLIC is not rewarded for its current exposure to credit risk. This is done by not only comparing current and historical BBB spreads (their respective means and standard deviations) but also comparing them to BBB historical default rates.  The error in this situation would be to ignore (1) historical data and (2) Not comparing historical default rates to BBB spreads. This may lead the investment manager to assume that the BBB securities are fine and there is no need for a quality tilt strategy.
Another error would occur in processing. In this case it would be through poor oversight or not considering financial disclosures. The disclosures in this case would be either in financial statements and financial covenants for corporations or financial disclosures to securitized securities. For instance, Mr. Wendlandt states the underwriting standards had dropped significantly and that LBO contracts were covenant lite. Ignoring this information would make the investment manager assume that the risk levels are the same and there is no point for a quality tilt strategy.

- **One-Click Deployment** - No servers. No databases. Only files.

## Themes

Wowchemy and its templates come with **automatic day (light) and night (dark) mode** built-in. Alternatively, visitors can choose their preferred mode - click the moon icon in the top right of the [Demo](https://academic-demo.netlify.com/) to see it in action! Day/night mode can also be disabled by the site admin in `params.toml`.

[Choose a stunning **theme** and **font**](https://wowchemy.com/docs/customization) for your site. Themes are fully customizable.

## License

Copyright 2022-present [Daniel Sineus](https://georgecushen.com).

Released under the [MIT](https://github.com/wowchemy/wowchemy-hugo-modules/blob/master/LICENSE.md) license.
